[Doc] Font Types and Font Subsetting (#20450)
matplotlib/matplotlib: doc/users/fonts.rst

All about Matplotlib and Fonts!
===============================

The story of fonts has been quite eventful throughout time. It involves
contributions of tech giants such as the likes of Adobe, Apple and Microsoft.

Types
-----
In practice, there are 3 types Matplotlib supports (in addition to
'core fonts', more about which is explained later in the guide):

.. list-table:: Type of Fonts
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Type 1 (PDF)
     - Type 3 (PDF/PS)
     - TrueType (PDF)
   * - One of the oldest types, introduced by Adobe
     - Similar to Type 1 in terms of introduction
     - Newer than previous types, used commonly today, introduced by Apple
   * - Restricted subset of PostScript, charstrings are in bytecode
     - Full PostScript language, allows embedding arbitrary code
       (in theory, even render fractals when rasterizing!)
     - Include a virtual machine that can execute code!
   * - These fonts support font hinting
     - Do not support font hinting
     - Hinting supported (virtual machine processes the "hints")
   * - Difficult to subset!
     - Easy to subset!

>      - Very hard to subset!

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is "very hard" to subset, it's just a lot of work: it needs someone to understand the font format, build the implementation and test it. There are libraries like ttconv and fonttools that can do it, so it makes sense to use them. Likewise with Type 1, but neither of those two libraries helps us with it. Software like pdftex produces subsets of Type 1 fonts, but I don't think the TeX license is compatible with ours so we can't just extract the code from pdftex.

Author: Reworded the points 👍🏼

  - Limited Support with Matplotlib

Subsetting
----------
Matplotlib is able to generate documents in multiple different formats. Some of
those formats (for example, PDF, PS/EPS, SVG) allow embedding font data in such
a way that when these documents are visually scaled, the text does not appear
pixelated.

This can be achieved by virtually embedding the *whole* font file within the
output document. However, this can lead to **very large documents**, wherein
most of the size bandwidth is captured by that font file data.

Font Subsetting is a way to embed only the *required* glyphs within the
documents. Fonts can be considered as a collection of glyphs, so ultimately the
goal is to find out *which* glyphs are required for a certain array of
characters, and embed only those within the output.

.. note::
  The role of subsetter really shines when we encounter characters like `ä`
  (composed by calling subprograms for **a** and **¨**); since the subsetter
  has to find out *all* such subprograms being called by every glyph included
  in the subset, and since there is almost no consistency within multiple
  different backends and the types of subsetting, this is a generally difficult

>   problem!

Reviewer: I'm not sure that the consistency between backends or lack thereof is relevant here - we need to implement subsetting for vector backends only, and the graph search needed for subsetting is independent of the backend.

Author: I reworded these points 👍🏼

What to use?
------------
Practically, most fonts that are readily available on most operating systems or
are readily available on the internet to download include *TrueType fonts* and
its "extensions" such as MacOS-resource fork fonts and the newer OpenType
fonts.

PS and PDF backends provide support for yet another type of fonts, which remove
the need of subsetting altogether! These are called **Core Fonts**, and
Matplotlib calls them via the keyword **AFM**; all that is supplied from
Matplotlib to such documents are font metrics (specified in AFM format), and it
is the job of the viewer applications to supply the glyph definitions.

This is especially helpful to generate *really lightweight* documents.::

    # trigger core fonts for PDF backend
    plt.rcParams["pdf.use14corefonts"] = True
    # trigger core fonts for PS backend
    plt.rcParams["ps.useafm"] = True

    chars = "AFM ftw!"
    fig, ax = plt.subplots()
    ax.text(0.5, 0.5, chars)

    fig.savefig("AFM_PDF.pdf", format="pdf")
    fig.savefig("AFM_PS.ps", format="ps)

.. note::
  These core fonts are limited to PDF and PS backends only; they can not be

>   rendered in other backends.

Reviewer: A possible downside is that while the font metrics are standardized, different pdf consumer applications will have different fonts, so the document might look different on e.g. Windows and Linux, if the Linux tools include free versions of the proprietary fonts.

Author: Thanks! Added this

> All about Matplotlib and Fonts!
> ===============================

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fonts in the Matplotlib text engine
=========================

Users can configure the fonts used by Matplotlib to render text with the default engine.  Users
using TeX to render fonts (``usetex=True``) should consult `APPROPRIATE REFERENCE HERE`.

```

Author: Yep, added a slightly modified version of this 👍🏼

> The story of fonts has been quite eventful throughout time. It involves
> contributions of tech giants such as the likes of Adobe, Apple and Microsoft.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fonts have a long and sometimes incompatible history in computing, leading to different platforms supporting different types of fonts.  
```

Author: 👍🏼

> 
> Types
> -----

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

     - Subsetted via external module `fonttools <https://github.com/fonttools/fonttools>`_

NOTE: Adobe will disable support for authoring with Type 1 fonts in
January 2023. `Read more here. <https://helpx.adobe.com/fonts/kb/postscript-type-1-fonts-end-of-support.html>`_

Special Mentions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Type 42 fonts (PS):

  - PostScript wrapper around TrueType fonts
  - 42 is the `Answer to Life, the Universe, and Everything! <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Answer_to_Life,_the_Universe,_and_Everything>`_
  - Matplotlib uses an external library called `fonttools <https://github.com/fonttools/fonttools>`_
    to subset these types of fonts

- OpenType fonts:

  - OpenType is a new standard for digital type fonts, developed jointly by
    Adobe and Microsoft
  - Generally contain a much larger character set!
  - Limited Support with Matplotlib

Subsetting
----------
Matplotlib is able to generate documents in multiple different formats. Some of
those formats (for example, PDF, PS/EPS, SVG) allow embedding font data in such
a way that when these documents are visually scaled, the text does not appear
pixelated.

> This can be achieved by virtually embedding the *whole* font file within the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can be achieved by embedding the *whole* font file within the
```
 the embedding isn't "virtual" is it?

Author: Virtual in the sense that we don't directly embed the whole file, we embed glyph data in streams. (hence the word, virtual)

Reviewer 3: I agree with @jklymak that while we may be embedding a transformed version of the font, the "Virtually" here is more confusing that helpful.

Author: Ah okay, think I understand. Let me update 👍🏼

> output document. However, this can lead to **very large documents**, wherein
> most of the size bandwidth is captured by that font file data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
output document. However, this can lead to very large documents, as font 
files can be quite large if they have many glyphs.
```

Author: Added a slight modification to this

> Font Subsetting is a way to embed only the *required* glyphs within the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Font subsetting embeds only the *required* glyphs within
```

Author: Actually, subsetting doesn't equate to embedding. We embed _after_ we subset, so 'font subsetting' is a 'way' to embed...
(maybe "Font Subsetting can be used to embed...")

Reviewer 2: Are there other ways to embed only the required glyphs, other than subsetting?  If not, then the phrase "is a way" is needlessly indirect and mysterious.  Perhaps you are trying to make a distinction here I dont understand?

Author: Actually there's no connection of 'embedding' with 'subsetting', and I tried to make exactly that distinction.

_With_ subsetting, the no. of glyphs are reduced, but at no point does it interfere with the 'embedding' part. Embedding is that dumb stage in the pipeline at which we can throw either a subsetted, or a non-subsetted font, and it will embed it in the document happily.

Author: I've anyway changed it to:
```
Font Subsetting can be used before generating documents, to embed only the
*required* glyphs within the documents.
```

documents. Fonts can be considered as a collection of glyphs, so ultimately the
goal is to find out *which* glyphs are required for a certain array of
characters, and embed only those within the output.

.. note::
  The role of subsetter really shines when we encounter characters like **ä**
  (composed by calling subprograms for **a** and **¨**); since the subsetter
  has to find out *all* such subprograms being called by every glyph included
  in the subset, this is a generally difficult problem!

Luckily, Matplotlib uses a fork of an external dependency called
`ttconv <https://github.com/sandflow/ttconv>`_, which helps in embedding and

> subsetting stuff. (however, recent versions have moved away from ttconv to pure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
subsetting glyphs. (however, recent versions have moved away from ttconv to pure
```

Author: Changed it to 'font data', since all this isn't just for the glyphs but also for other metadata

All about Matplotlib and Fonts!
===============================

The story of fonts has been quite eventful throughout time. It involves
contributions of tech giants such as the likes of Adobe, Apple and Microsoft.

Types
-----
In practice, there are 3 types Matplotlib supports:

.. list-table:: Type of Fonts
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Type 1 (PDF)
     - Type 3 (PDF/PS)
     - TrueType (PDF)
   * - One of the oldest types, introduced by Adobe
     - Similar to Type 1 in terms of introduction
     - Newer than previous types, most commonly used today, introduced by Apple
   * - They use simplified PostScript

>        (subset of full PostScript language)

Reviewer: This may oversimplify the matter a little - the Type 1 wrapper format is a restricted subset of PostScript but the glyph programs ("charstrings") are in a bytecode format that is not really PostScript, although the operators are close to some PostScript operators.

Author: Updated this bit

     - However, they use full PostScript language, which allows embedding
       arbitrary code!
       (in theory, even render fractals when rasterizing!)
     - They include a virtual machine that can execute code!
   * - These fonts support font hinting
     - Do not support font hinting
     - Hinting supported (virtual machine processes the "hints")

>    * - Expressed in pretty compact bytecode

Reviewer: The bytecode is only in the charstrings, the container format is either ASCII-based pfa or binary pfb, both of which contain a restricted subset of PostScript, some of it encrypted, and the PostScript includes the charstrings.

Author: I see, I think this 'expressed in terms of' comparison can be removed?

Special Mentions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Type 42 fonts (PS):

  - PostScript wrapper around TrueType fonts
  - 42 is the `Answer to Life, the Universe, and Everything! <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Answer_to_Life,_the_Universe,_and_Everything>`_
  - Very hard to subset!

- OpenType fonts:

  - OpenType is a new standard for digital type fonts, developed jointly by
    Adobe and Microsoft
  - Generally contain a much larger character set!
  - Limited Support with Matplotlib

Subsetting
----------
Matplotlib is able to generate documents in multiple different formats. Some of
those formats (for example, PDF, PS/EPS, SVG) allow embedding font data in such
a way that when these documents are visually scaled, the text does not appear
pixelated.

This can be achieved by virtually embedding the *whole* font file within the
output document. However, this can lead to **very large documents**, wherein
most of the size bandwidth is captured by that font file data.

Font Subsetting is a way to embed only the *required* glyphs within the
documents. Fonts can be considered as a collection of glyphs, so ultimately the
goal is to find out *which* glyphs are required for a certain piece of text,

> and embed only those within the output.

Author: That was informative!
Added this bit 👍🏼
